an official website of the united states governmentwe ve made some changes to epagov .
if the information you are looking for is not here you may be able to find it on the epa web archive or the january web snapshotsearch epa programs tools models and other resources that promote sustainabilitysustainability is based on a simple principle everything that we need for our survival and wellbeing depends either directly or indirectly on our natural environment .
to pursue sustainability is to create and maintain the conditions under which humans and nature can exist in productive harmony to support present and future generationslearn more about sustainability and how epa incorporates it into its work in the national reseach council s report sustainability and the us epathe national environmental policy act of committed the united states to sustainability declaring it a national policy to create and maintain conditions under which humans and nature can exist in productive harmony that permit fulfilling the social economic and other requirements of present and future generations in the years since nepa was enacted the public s interest in sustainability has broadened .
according to the national research council there are many additional drivers for sustainability .
in the areas where the us has seen considerable progress in sustainability a common driver for sustainability efforts is citizens and other stakeholders concern .
in addition sustainability practitioners are becoming more ambitious in their sustainability efforts and are working together to share best practices to ensure the greatest environmental economic and social impact .
epa has a long history of working toward sustainable outcomes .
to encourage progress epa developed a strategic approach to incorporate sustainability principles into its work .
epa has a variety of methods tools guidances and programs that the application of sustainability within decisionmaking including this database is an inventory of sustainability indicators classified into a single system .
its design assists researchers and stakeholders in identifying specific indicators relevant to parts of the ecosystem such as air water energy human health risks and communities in general .
under development is a web tool that includes dosii the human wellbeing index and the environmental quality indexexecutive orders and governmentwide practices also influence epa s work .
learn more at the following links contact us to ask a question provide feedback or report a problemlast updated on october .
