sustainability is a relatively new discipline within the environmental and business fields .
sustainability at its simplest terms combines economics business social human environment and environmental science .
the goal of sustainability is to find a balanced approach that minimizes risks to these areas in order to maintain or enhance the quality of life in the future .
it can also been defined as the study to minimize and mitigate environmental impacts caused by human actions .
environmental sustainability is just a slightly redundant term for true sustainability as everything relies on the environment .
in order to major in environmental sustainability it is imperative to select a program offering ecology and environmental classesthe international society of sustainable professionals issp was formed in and has over members worldwide .
these members have developed careers in just about every sector including industry manufacturing retail technology biotechnology utilities consultants nonprofit organizations and public agencies .
it would be difficult to find a field that does not embody the tenets of sustainability .
consumers are increasingly incorporating the sustainability of a product prior to choosing a product to purchase .
technology has opened the entire supply chain to tracking and study for not just efficiency but effectiveness .
environmental corporate and financial regulations are evolving and becoming increasingly intertwined .
sustainability will continue to grow in order to meet these unique needssustainability is truly interdisciplinary and can be found under the umbrella of such disciplines as planning agriculture business law engineering technology environmental sciences environmental studies and biology .
sustainability can be further broken down into specialties such as business operations agriculture and government operations .
one area of sustainability that tends to be consistent across the disciplines is the identification and awareness of the associated environmental and human health impacts along the supply chain from raw materials to the final product .
the study of how policy or regulatory requirements affect the environment human health and economy is also under the field of sustainability .
the ultimate goal of sustainability is to enable an atmosphere for economic growth without adversely affecting the environment or human populationtitles within the sustainability field are wide and varied .
some common titles include sustainability coordinator sustainability manager sustainability director chief sustainability officer leed professional environmental specialist environmental scientist chemist urban planner transportation specialist project manager environmental manager procurement officer policy analyst business analyst environmental lawyer environmental engineer supply chain manager and health safety specialistlearn more about the various sustainability career fieldsmost of the top environmental colleges offer degrees in sustainability or focuses on sustainable principles .
there are a total of collegiate options including degrees and certificates .
a sustainability focused degree is available at the associates bachelor s master s and doctoral levels .
there are also undergraduate nondegree certificates and graduate nondegree certificates offered .
the higher level degrees offer greater flexibility and growth in a sustainable career .
some disciplines require a doctoral degree in order to be competitive in the field .
many schools offer a dual degree option for a combined bachelor s and master s degree .
certificates are a great way to show mastery of a subject when one already holds a degree .
they also offer an opportunity that is relatively risk free to determine if this field is right for you .
another riskfree option is the ability to audit college courses .
auditing is usually at a lower cost because you will not receive official college credit but will expose you to the subject matter level of effort required and provide a sense of the teaching styles among the professorsaccording to the association for the advancement of sustainability in higher education aashe there are there is some consistency regarding the common coursework between the degree and certificate options .
all require a combination of businesseconomics natural sciences and social sciences .
undergraduate and graduate coursework includes ethics sustainable business energy systems chemistry sociology and biology .
arizona state university asu provides a good explanation of the difference in focus between a bachelors of art ba and bachelors of science bs .
their bachelors of art ba degree focuses on sustainability of environmental resources and social institutions while their bachelors of science bs degree focuses on sustainable use of environmental resources certificate coursework includes sustainable business technology energy systems policy and sociologyimportant points to consider are the length of time for degree completion and the amount of financial aid available to offset the costs .
a master s degree generally requires to years to complete and a doctoral degree can take greater than years to completesustainability is a wide field that is rapidly undergoing change as it grows .
as such make sure you choose a school that offers a concentration that is of interest to you and provides future career growth .
if you plan to pursue a doctoral program choosing a master s degree with research or thesis options would be of benefit .
if you need to enter the workforce as quickly as possible consider starting with the associates degree and continuing with a dual bachelor and master s degree program .
certificates are a great option if you already have a degree and would like to focus on this new fieldonline programs have an advantage of providing access to students whose employment make attending traditional classes difficult students who are not within driving distance to the campus and students who need the flexibility to attend courses when it fits their schedule .
sustainability as its own discipline is relatively new and most degree programs are offered in a traditional or combined traditional and online environment .
however some colleges have begun offering online sustainability degrees and the amounts of online programs are anticipated to grow in the future .
an example of an online graduate degree program has been provided belowthose wanting to advance their education in sustainable management but require maximum flexibility are typically drawn to an online master s degree in sustainable management .
many schools offer both inperson and online options giving students the choice to complete their degree according to their own unique circumstances .
these programs offer graduate level courses that help bridge the gap between scientific process and social implementation and action .
the goal is to prepare environmental advocates for systemic change and progress .
common courses in the ms .
program include some programs allow you to go down a science and engineering track within the degree or a social science and business track depending on what job route you are interested in .
most programs contain a mix of the two .
the majority of students who choose this degree path are those who have completed a bachelor s degree and want to advance past the entry to midlevel management positions in construction business operations and other environmental sectors that they currently hold .
graduates of this program go on to careers in business services manufacturing trade and transportation and environmental health and safety .
some of the specific career titles a master s in sustainable management can lead to include energy analyst director of global environmental affairs green marketing consultant sustainable design specialist and environmental policy analyst just to name a fewschools in the country offering this program include important points to consider are the length of time for degree completion and the amount of financial aid available to offset the costs .
the cost associated with sustainability degrees and certificates range from a year to over a year depending on the school and degree being sought .
financial aid is available for sustainable degree programs for those that qualifyensure the school is accredited because most employers look at accreditation in addition to the actual degree obtained .
this is also your protection that the school has had their coursework and objectives reviewed and approved by a neutral authority that provides credibility for the degrees .
accreditation also ensures consistency regarding the common coursework between the degree and certificate optionsbelow are a few schools that offer sustainability focused degreesdegree associate of science sustainability coordinatorprogram focus sustainability studies and sciencestudy options traditionalschool website http wwwlaneccedusustainabilitysustainabilitycoordinatorprogram overview this degree will provide a solid foundation for students to begin their careers in the sustainability field or enter into a bachelor s degree programcourse requirements this degree requires credits which consist of foundation and core credits and credits towards electives and career technical educationadmission requirements the admission requirements include transcripts from high school or ged placement testing and meeting with an advisortuition the anticipated tuition costs are including books and miscellaneous fees eg .
lab technology etc degree bachelor of science in sustainabilityprogram focus sustainability studies and sciencestudy options traditional and onlineprogram overview this program focuses on teaching a solid foundation in sustainability and includes linking concepts to realworld problemsdegree bachelor of arts in sustainabilityprogram focus sustainability studies and sciencestudy options traditional and onlineschool website http wwwusdeduartsandsciencessustainabilityindexcfmprogram overview the program offers a solid foundation for students to understand current issues within the sustainability field and the problem solving skills to address themability to choose concentration yes with choices between natural sciences or social sciencescourse requirements this degree requires credits which consist of core credits and credits towards electives minor and majoradmission requirements the admission requirements include one of the three options achieve an act composite score of or above sat grade point average of at least scale or rank in the upper percent of their high school classtuition the anticipated tuition costs are per year not including books and miscellaneous fees eg .
lab technology etc degree masters of arts in biological sciences global sustainability program focus sustainability studies and sciencestudy options traditional and onlineschool website http webccsueducatalogmasterdegreeprogramscourse requirements this degree requires credits towards the majoradmission requirements the admission requirements include providing collegiate transcripts narrative personal statement letters of recommendation evaluation and application for admission .
gre scores are recommended but not requiredtuition the anticipated resident tuition costs are per year including room and board but not books .
some miscellaneous fees eg .
lab technology etc may not be includeddegree masters of arts in sustainability studiesprogram focus sustainability studies and sciencestudy options traditional and onlineschool website http webccsueducatalogmasterdegreeprogramsprogram overview combines natural sciences social sciences and business in order for students to be able to identify problems and offer solutions to advance the field of sustainabilityability to choose concentration yescourse requirements this degree consist of courses towards the major .
at least courses are offered in the major of sustainabilityadmission requirements the admission requirements include providing collegiate transcripts narrative personal statement letters of recommendation resume and application for admission .
an interview is available but not mandatory .
gre scores are not required but are accepted if submittedtuition the anticipated resident tuition costs are per year not including books room and board or miscellaneous fees eg .
lab technology etc degree doctoral degree in sustainable developmentprogram focus urban studies and planningstudy options traditionalschool website https sipacolumbiaeduacademicsprogramsphdinsustainabledevelopmentprogram overview the focus of this program is to provide the skills necessary for students to pursue policy and research opportunities within the sustainability fieldability to choose concentration yes .
there are up to areas of concentration availablecourse requirements a total of credits are required including core courses and elective courses .
a minimum b average is required for the core classes .
students are required to participate in integrative seminars complete a thesis with an oral exam present and defend a dissertation .
students are expected to actively complete a research and teaching requirementadmission requirements students must successfully complete an undergraduate degree program with a solid foundation in economics mathematics and science .
applicants must also have high scores on the gretuition the anticipated resident tuition costs are per year not including books or miscellaneous fees eg .
lab technology etc .
fulltuition fellowships including stipends and health insurance are available for all admitted students who are not already sponsored by their governments employers or a foundation .
