by administrator lisa p jacksonthis week i join colleagues from across the us and around the world at the un conference on sustainable development .
on the anniversary of the un earth summit that set an early course for sustainability across the globe we are working to shape the next years of sustainable development with the help of governments businesses students nonprofits and global citizensour work will be focused on new strategies to reinvest in the health and prosperity of urban communities .
today more people around the world live in cities than in rural areas .
as that trend continues in the coming years we will stretch the limits of our transportation systems and energy infrastructure and be challenged to meet crucial needs like supplying food and clean water and safely disposing of waste .
we re taking this opportunity at to develop strategies for both improving existing infrastructure and building new efficient cuttingedge systems .
innovations in water protection waste disposal energy production construction and transportation present significant opportunities for new technologies green jobs and savings for families businesses and communitiesduring my time in rio i plan to talk about the great work happening in communities across our nation .
i will be sharing the stories of individuals and organizations that are implementing new environmental education programs and creating the green jobs of the future and we re preparing to unveil videos submitted through the youth sustainability challenge .
we want to hear from you as well .
please send us your stories of sustainability this week on facebook and twitter using the hashtag epario so that we can share them with the worldeven if you can t be there in person i hope you will join online .
go to http to see and participate in all of the events being hosted by the us government and be a part of our efforts to build a better more sustainable and more prosperous futureabout the author lisa jackson is the administrator of the us environmental protection agencyeditor s note the views expressed here are intended to explain epa policy .
they do not change anyone s rights or obligations .
you may share this post .
however please do not change the title or the content or remove epa s identity as the author .
if you do make substantive changes please do not attribute the edited title or content to epa or the author .
epa s official web site is wwwepagov .
some links on this page may redirect users from the epa website to specific content on a nonepa thirdparty site .
in doing so epa is directing you only to the specific content referenced at the time of publication not to any other content that may appear on the same webpage or elsewhere on the thirdparty site or be added at a later date .
epa is providing this link for informational purposes only .
epa can not attest to the accuracy of nonepa information provided by any thirdparty sites or any other linked site .
epa does not endorse any nongovernment websites companies internet applications or any policies or information expressed therein .
see previous posts .
