A Master of Business Administration (MBA) is a great way to advance your career in business and earn a higher salary. MBA programs include foundational coursework in several areas of business, allowing you the flexibility to transfer across departments at your organization once you earn your degree. At the same time, specializing in Sustainability and Environmental Compliance can set you apart, develop a specialized area of expertise, and help you make a positive impact on the world.
Graduates of MBA programs in Sustainability and Environmental Compliance get a firm foundation in business administration and become experts on integrating sustainability concepts into business operations. Students will learn about the environmental challenges facing businesses, and how to address them.
Opportunities for MBA holders specializing in sustainability and environmental compliance are expanding. Manufacturers, developers, oil and gas firms, and many other types of companies must comply with complex environmental regulations. A growing number of other large companies also have staff or departments that focus on corporate social responsibility.
After receiving your degree, you'll be ready to join their ranks. You'll help your organization comply with changing environmental laws, and achieve sustainability goals in the most economically efficient way. You'll also have the inside track on how management can take advantage of business opportunities by going green. In short, you'll be working to reconcile the needs of business and the environment, and helping make business more sustainable from within.
Applicants generally need a bachelor's degree from an accredited institution to be accepted into an MBA program. While experience in business or environmental studies isn't usually required, taking business and sustainability courses as an undergraduate can increase your chances of admission.
An online MBA is a more convenient option than a traditional MBA. With an online MBA, there's no need to uproot your life to pursue a degree, and you can save time and money by studying from home. While class schedules for an online MBA can be more flexible, most programs require at least some scheduled sessions.
Southern New Hampshire University in Manchester offers an online MBA in Sustainability and Environmental Compliance. Students learn to analyze relevant issues and make recommendations for complying with laws and regulations. They also learn how to communicate green initiatives as practical efficiency measures and good business.
While many MBAs can take three years to complete, students can finish SNHU's MBA program in just over a year. Participants take classes covering environmental issues, energy and society, and environmental compliance/sustainability, as well as foundational courses in:
An MBA capstone course in which students synthesize the concepts and skills they've learned is also required.
SNHU is regionally accredited by the New England Association of Schools and Colleges, and nationally accredited by the Accreditation Council for Business Schools and Programs. The GMAT and GRE are not required for admission.
Southern New Hampshire University's International MBA with a concentration in Sustainability and Environmental Compliance prepares students to participate in the increasingly globalized economy. It develops an awareness of different cultures, and knowledge of research methods for investigating international markets. And since environmental problems often cross political boundaries, it also provides an international context for these issues.
While most participants in the International MBA program have undergraduate degrees in business, the program also accepts applicants with related degrees in foreign languages, social sciences, and natural sciences. Most applicants are already working in business, and pursue the MBA to advance their careers.
As with the MBA in Sustainability and Environmental Compliance, students learn best business practices, how to assess and comply with environmental laws and regulations, and how to address environmental problems while remaining profitable. However, the International MBA adds a global dimension. Students learn how politics, international law, and disparate economic policies, regulatory systems, and cultural beliefs affect business decisions. Graduates will be able to navigate their multi-national organizations through these differences to maintain a cohesive, successful global enterprise.
The International MBA in Sustainability and Environmental Compliance includes foundational business courses. However, students with undergraduate degrees in business may be exempted from these courses. Participants also take classes covering environmental issues, energy and society, and environmental compliance/sustainability, as well as courses in the following areas:
SNHU offers an optional two-week study abroad program in countries with emerging markets, such as Russia, China, Brazil, and Turkey. Students can also take advantage of the University's International Business Modeling Laboratory for their research activities. The 39-credit program can be completed in 18 months.
Opportunities for MBAs abound in businesses of nearly all sizes and types. Most MBAs find employment in management, scientific, and technical consulting services (including environmental consulting). Employment in these fields is projected to expand at a very high rate of 83% through 2020. Specifically, MBAs find employment in financial services, science and technology, healthcare, and manufacturing. They may work for large corporations, smaller environmental consulting firms, renewable energy and sustainability trade associations, and environmental nonprofits.
The increasing globalized economy means that people with International MBAs are in particularly high demand. These high-paying jobs typically involve more responsibility and longer work weeks, but also include overseas travel. You'll be well-qualified for both sustainability-focused and generalized high-level positions with either MBA degree.$("#adsection_container_11573").load("https://www.environmentalscience.org/wp-content/themes/environmental-science/scripts/externalad/server/external_server.php?header_type=h3&show_widget=y&show_listings=y&title=&show_header=&id=&category_id=57&type=in_content&post_id=19629&current_page_url=ZiW4ICHZCjQI817Oy7xGjFmV2Mxs00cNyAcuxBvPrjgREMQNi7DrcK5uvlKkuUSGaGveNom2fyXt4CR5tHBJrFG2A6GjlNDmiClSzzlntkXXZZZIEv4lXI4aZhBdEAO2WTk&results=2&level=3&subtitle=&u=&sub_id=environmentalscience.org&sub_id2=&display_ad_type=environmentalsciencedegreeace.com"); 


