Connect the dots between the Guiding Principles for Sustainable Federal Buildings and other industry standards, guidelines and rating systems.
Plug loads refer to energy used by equipment that is plugged into an outlet. In an office, key plug loads include computer and monitors,                                             printers, and copiers. Plug loads can average approximately 30% of electricity use in office settings, much of which can                                             be attributed to parasitic loads.
Determine which upgrades could be most cost-effective based on the size and location of your building.
Use integrative design approaches and collaborative practices to save time and money.
Explore interior office workspaces and learn about sustainable design best practices as you compare materials.
Explore building systems, their relationships to one another, and the integrative team necessary to reach sustainability goals.

                                            The Green Procurement Compilation (GPC) is a comprehensive green purchasing resource designed for federal contracting personnel and program managers.
                                        

                                            View generic solicitation/contract language that can be used to incorporate minimum sustainability requirements into contracts for products.
                                        
This responsible business conduct module provides a framework for how best practices and resources for responsible business conduct can be incorporated within procurements. Responsible business conduct includes promoting workers’ rights and safe working conditions, preventing human trafficking, and addressing other human rights-related risks. It is especially important for contracts with a higher risk for adverse impacts on human rights (risk factors discussed below). This module will be updated as new best practices and tools are identified.
On procurements that entail sourcing products/services from a foreign country, recommend reviewing the below steps for practices to promote responsible business conduct. To understand how human rights have been addressed on previous procurements, visit the Responsible Business Case Studies page.
Depending on the sector, certain human rights are at higher risk than others. The chart below identifies some U.S. government and non-U.S. government sources that can be consulted as resources to determine whether and what risks may exist in specific sectors for procurements. This chart is intended to be illustrative, not comprehensive or authoritative. This chart is not a substitute for market research specific to your procurement. The abbreviations used are spelled out below the chart.
Human rights risks vary not only by sector, but by country. When sourcing from a foreign country, the following resources can help you identify country specific risks.
If there is a high risk for adverse impacts on human rights, consider using the solicitation to alert contractors to potential human rights impacts related to their supply of goods or services. Also, consider using the solicitation to encourage the contractor to publicly disclose policies and procedures that minimize adverse impacts on human rights. A useful tool that assists companies in developing such disclosures is the United Nations Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights Reporting Framework  . Informing the contractor about these risks and encouraging transparent reporting will help minimize risks to your organization from these practices and let contractors know you are interested in avoiding these impacts.
Depending on the risks your market research reveals and dollar value and complexity of the procurement, consider requiring contractors to implement one or more of the following practices. Such requirements should be narrowly tailored to address the specific risks you have identified.
This section provides sample contract language to address common risks for specific procurement types as well as provide general language that can be used with different procurements. This sample solicitation/contract language may be used as a starting point for addressing risks associated with responsible business conduct. While the sample language represents one potential approach, other language or equivalent certifications may be used to address these risks. It is important to tailor the goals and requirements to each individual acquisition.
“Any apparel provided under this contract must be supplied by a member of the Sustainable Apparel Coalition.”
"Any electronics (IT Hardware, IT Software, Monitors, Cell Phones) provided under this contract must be supplied by a member of the Electronic Industry Citizenship Coalition. In addition, any contractor or subcontractor providing information and communications technology products under this contract is encouraged to join the Global Network Initiative."
"Any beans, coffee, grains, sugar, or tea provided under this contract must be Fair Trade certified."
"Any rugs provided under this contract must be GoodWeave certified."
"Any seafood provided under this contract must be Marine Stewardship Council certified."
"The contractor must be a member of the International Code of Conduct for Private Security Service Providers (ICoCA)."
“Due to the potential for surgical instruments to be sourced or manufactured in locations with a record of human rights violations, the contractor is required to provide yes or no answers to the following questions within 30 days after award of the contract:
"Any green bell peppers, strawberries, or tomatoes provided under this contract must be a Participating Grower in the Fair Food Program."
"Any wood or forestry products (e.g. paper, packaging) provided under this contract must be {insert a forestry certification addressing corporate social responsibility} certified."
 
For questions on procurements with a high risk for adverse impacts on human rights or labor rights, you may contact: HRProcurement@state.gov.
Validate that the contractor complies with any responsible business requirements in the contract.


