Connect the dots between the Guiding Principles for Sustainable Federal Buildings and other industry standards, guidelines and rating systems.
Plug loads refer to energy used by equipment that is plugged into an outlet. In an office, key plug loads include computer and monitors,                                             printers, and copiers. Plug loads can average approximately 30% of electricity use in office settings, much of which can                                             be attributed to parasitic loads.
Determine which upgrades could be most cost-effective based on the size and location of your building.
Use integrative design approaches and collaborative practices to save time and money.
Explore interior office workspaces and learn about sustainable design best practices as you compare materials.
Explore building systems, their relationships to one another, and the integrative team necessary to reach sustainability goals.

                                            The Green Procurement Compilation (GPC) is a comprehensive green purchasing resource designed for federal contracting personnel and program managers.
                                        

                                            View generic solicitation/contract language that can be used to incorporate minimum sustainability requirements into contracts for products.
                                        
This module is intended for the acquisition workforce (particularly procurement officials, requirement officials/specifiers, and other staff who affect acquisition decisions) to help verify contractor compliance with sustainability requirements specified in contracts. Both pre-award procurement actions for incorporating sustainability best practices into the contract and post-award procurement actions for verifying compliance with contract requirements are covered. For information on determining what sustainable requirements are applicable for your procurement, visit the Green Procurement Compilation.
 
 
Visit Resources for Verifying Sustainable Products for guidance on determining whether documentation provided by the contractor confirms the product or service meets the sustainable requirements included in the contract.


